[Music]
well if there's one tuning one alternate
the guitar tuning that's associated with
celtic music more than any other it is
the infamous dadgad da d GA d and i want
to talk a little bit about what the
tuning is how it arose how you get there
and what you can do with it there it is
so what is it it is to my interpretation
it's an altered version of open D I mean
you normally get there from standard
tuning but that's not how it arose it
arose
I think as a variation of that now that
is
straight open D tuning you can think of
that as your cowboy Ecore it in standard
take those notes turn the whole thing
down a whole stack and that's what
you'll get that's open D chin it's a D
major chord D ad F sharp D and this
tuning is as old as the guitar itself
I'm sure it I can't play slide guitar to
save my life but this tunings been used
for that one finger gets you your three
chord trick
there's your four chord five chord and
there's your one
[Music]
I'm a huge Joni Mitchell sir she used
that tuning a great deal so what are the
disadvantages well how do you play D
minor you can do it but there's a major
third lane to trip you up on you could
shoot dance but then how do you play in
D major so
tuning two straight cards is a useful
thing but it's it's kind of limiting in
a general sense it narrows your harmonic
focus unless you want to spend the rest
of your life figuring out how to play in
G flat minor when you're tuned to open B
I'm sure it can be done bill whether
it's worthwhile doing I don't know
Davey Graham in 1964 so the story goes
came up with a brilliant idea which was
forget all about the third
take that third string up to a fourth
[Music]
and then you have da d G a D which are
the constituents of dadgad but think of
it in terms of intervals that goes root
fifth root fourth fifth root there's no
third so even playing D major very
easily
plenty minor
[Music]
with a bit of effort you can play in
b-flat
[Laughter]
and you can plane out the keys you have
three your three strings tuned to D so
it does regardless of your level of
virtuosity it does favor let's go to
that we have favored certain keys above
others but there's a lot to be explored
in this tuning and it does for various
reasons lend itself very easily to to
Celtic music to the extent that when I
started playing in the 70s this tuning
was almost universal virtually everybody
with the exception I think of our team
England in Ireland everyone played in in
that gap jinuk and I use it for not so
much for accompaniment like many do I
use it for playing jigs and reels and
airs and other things so let me give you
a little insight into how this tuning
works you have between your third and
second strings
[Music]
a whole tone interval
so that's consecutive strings being part
of the scale like
[Music]
so those little triads little three-note
clusters
[Music]
make it very easy to play melodies
across the strings so let's nail down a
D major scale I know scales are very
tedious but
[Music]
what I want to get at is the difference
between that
and this
[Music]
now that's a question of playing across
the strings that's what's going on if
you think of that scale what strings are
you using 2 2 2 2 3 4 4 4 but here
it goes one two three two three four
five four
you're never using the same string twice
in a row so the result of that is that
the preceding note is still sounding
when you play the next note
[Music]
and you can extend it you can start
there
[Music]
that's two full octaves without hitting
the same string twice in a row then the
next thing to do would be to try
different keys and different keys are
radically more difficult in tapia tuning
but they can be done b-flat for example
should you want to plan B flat I cheated
there I used the same string twice you
could you could do the stretch but
[Music]
so the the favorite keys would be d
there's a demon no third these DS and
A's roots and fifths a minor a major C
can be done F G
[Music]
and others b-minor
because once you and I play the sunset
which is an f-sharp minor
[Music]
so it's a beautiful churning for
articulating maladies in a way that the
notes ring into one another that's the
whole ethos I think if that gets you and
certainly the reason why I became so
popular and it's still today being
explored in great detail and with to
great effect by many many players PR
bounces on will be one Martin Simpson
several others it's used a great deal
and still in rhythm guitar and Irish
music to an extent that people began to
kind of sound the same but as the
certain players are really using it to
great in fact again I don't use it much
for accompaniment I use it for freshly
playing the tunes and over the course of
these lessons will use this tuning to
explore some of the dance music from
Ireland and Scotland and elsewhere who
knows Brittany maybe let's see
[Music]